Adversaries may attempt to position themselves between two or more networked devices using an adversary-in-the-middle (AiTM) technique to support follow-on behaviors such as Network Sniffing, Transmitted Data Manipulation, or replay attacks (Exploitation for Credential Access). By abusing features of common networking protocols that can determine the flow of network traffic (e.g. ARP, DNS, LLMNR, etc.), adversaries may force a device to communicate through an adversary controlled system so they can collect information or perform additional actions.[1]

For example, adversaries may manipulate victim DNS settings to enable other malicious activities such as preventing/redirecting users from accessing legitimate sites and/or pushing additional malware.[2][3][4] Adversaries may also manipulate DNS and leverage their position in order to intercept user credentials, including access tokens (Steal Application Access Token) and session cookies (Steal Web Session Cookie).[5][6] Downgrade Attacks can also be used to establish an AiTM position, such as by negotiating a less secure, deprecated, or weaker version of communication protocol (SSL/TLS) or encryption algorithm.[7][8][9]

Adversaries may also leverage the AiTM position to attempt to monitor and/or modify traffic, such as in Transmitted Data Manipulation. Adversaries can setup a position similar to AiTM to prevent traffic from flowing to the appropriate destination, potentially to impair defenses and/or in support of a Network Denial of Service.

ID: T1557
Sub-techniques:  T1557.001, T1557.002, T1557.003, T1557.004
ⓘ
Tactics: Credential Access, Collection
ⓘ
Platforms: Linux, Network Devices, Windows, macOS
Contributors: Daniil Yugoslavskiy, @yugoslavskiy, Atomic Threat Coverage project; Mayuresh Dani, Qualys; NEC
Version: 2.5
Created: 11 February 2020
Last Modified: 12 May 2026
Version Permalink
Procedure Examples
ID	Name	Description
C0046	ArcaneDoor	
ArcaneDoor included interception of HTTP traffic to victim devices to identify and parse command and control information sent to the device.[10]

S0281	Dok	
Dok proxies web traffic to potentially monitor and alter victim HTTP(S) traffic.[11][12]

S9003	evilginx2	
evilginx2 has the ability to act as an adversary-in-the-middle (AiTM) relay between a legitimate website and a phished user to capture all transmitted data including usernames, passwords, authentication tokens, and session cookies and tokens.[13][14][15][16]

G0094	Kimsuky	
Kimsuky has used modified versions of PHProxy to examine web traffic between the victim and the accessed website.[17]

S1188	Line Runner	
Line Runner intercepts HTTP requests to the victim Cisco ASA, looking for a request with a 32-character, victim dependent parameter. If that parameter matches a value in the malware, a contained payload is then written to a Lua script and executed.[10]

G0129	Mustang Panda	
Mustang Panda leveraged a captive portal hijack that redirected the victim to a webpage that prompted the victim to download a malicious payload.[18]

S1131	NPPSPY	
NPPSPY opens a new network listener for the mpnotify.exe process that is typically contacted by the Winlogon process in Windows. A new, alternative RPC channel is set up with a malicious DLL recording plaintext credentials entered into Winlogon, effectively intercepting and redirecting the logon information.[19]

G1041	Sea Turtle	
Sea Turtle modified DNS records at service providers to redirect traffic from legitimate resources to Sea Turtle-controlled servers to enable adversary-in-the-middle attacks for credential capture.[20][21]

Mitigations
ID	Mitigation	Description
M1042	Disable or Remove Feature or Program	
Disable legacy network protocols that may be used to intercept network traffic if applicable, especially those that are not needed within an environment.

M1041	Encrypt Sensitive Information	
Ensure that all wired and/or wireless traffic is encrypted appropriately. Use best practices for authentication protocols, such as Kerberos, and ensure web traffic that may contain credentials is protected by SSL/TLS.

M1037	Filter Network Traffic	
Use network appliances and host-based security software to block network traffic that is not necessary within the environment, such as legacy protocols that may be leveraged for AiTM conditions.

M1035	Limit Access to Resource Over Network	
Limit access to network infrastructure and resources that can be used to reshape traffic or otherwise produce AiTM conditions.

M1031	Network Intrusion Prevention	
Network intrusion detection and prevention systems that can identify traffic patterns indicative of AiTM activity can be used to mitigate activity at the network level.

M1030	Network Segmentation	
Network segmentation can be used to isolate infrastructure components that do not require broad network access. This may mitigate, or at least alleviate, the scope of AiTM activity.

M1017	User Training	
Train users to be suspicious about certificate errors. Adversaries may use their own certificates in an attempt to intercept HTTPS traffic. Certificate errors may arise when the application’s certificate does not match the one expected by the host.

Detection Strategy
ID	Name	Analytic ID	Analytic Description
DET0296	Detect Adversary-in-the-Middle via Network and Configuration Anomalies	AN0823	
Detects suspicious DNS/ARP poisoning attempts, unauthorized modifications to registry/network configuration, or abnormal TLS downgrade activity. Correlates changes in system configuration with subsequent unusual network flows or authentication events.

AN0824	
Detects unauthorized edits to /etc/hosts, /etc/resolv.conf, or suspicious ARP broadcasts. Correlates file modifications with subsequent unexpected network sessions or service creation.

AN0825	
Detects unauthorized edits to system configuration profiles, unexpected certificate trust changes, or abnormal ARP/DNS patterns indicative of interception.

AN0826	
Detects unauthorized firmware or configuration changes enabling adversary-in-the-middle positioning (e.g., route injection, DNS spoofing, SSL downgrade). Behavioral analytics focus on sudden changes to routing tables or image file integrity failures.